# State and View, JS and Events

`TLDR`:

- The DOM is a representation of the elements that rendered on the page
- Javascript allows us to create and save data/state
- The Document object allow us (developers) to interact in JS with the DOM and therefore add data/state on the page
- Event handlers allow us to let the user change data in JS (and therefore re-update the DOM - re-render)

## UI development overview

### Almost every piece of technology needs a visual UI

- What is UI ?

Content displayed on a screen that a user can interact with.
For example :

- Tik Tok : allow you to view video and like and comment, create etc..

Everything we see on the screen is related to data under the hood :

- Number of views
- Number of likes
- Photos
- Comments and Number of comments etc..

There are two goals to `UI engineering` :

1. display content (state/data) on the screen
2. allow users to interact with that content (data), change underlying data

We're focusing on the web browser, but there are many others "machine" that display content and allow users to interact with that content :

- Pilot dashboard
- Microwave etc..

### How do we display content in the web browser?

- Via HTML :

1. HTML allows us to list the elements that we want to display on the page
2. We load it into the web browser
3. HTML code is parsed(read) by the HTML parser and turn into a list (written in C++ - web browser language) (simplified version or representation of the page)
4. The render engine will transform that list (model) into a page.

### How do we render HTML under the hood?

It's a 3 steps process :

`app.html`

1. first, we add in HTML a list of elements that we want to display on the page

```html
What's on your mind?
<input />
<button>
  Publish!<button>
    <div>
      <video src="/carpool.mp4">
        <p>Love les mis!</p>
        <p>♥️7</p>
      </video>
    </div>
  </button>
</button>
```

⤵️

2. That list of elements in HTML produces a list of elements in c++ called the DOM - Model (representation) of the page

```c++
[

 - 'Whats on your mind?'
 - input
 - button
   -- 'publish'
 - division
  --video -> `carpool.mp4`
  --p
    --'Love les mis!'
  --p
    --'♥️ 7'
]
```

3. List of elements in c++ is then converted into actual pixels rendered on the page

⤵️ Layout and render engine

```webpage
What's on your mind?

[      input              ]

[Button]

Love les mis!
♥️7
```

### How do we enable users to change the content they see on the screen?

What the user sees on the screen is under the hood stored as data.

So to enable users to change the content, we have to enable them to change the underlying data.

The way we can do this is by using `javascript`.

We have to use `javascript` to :

- create and save data/state
- run code to change it

### How do we use `javascript` to create and save data/state and display it on the screen?

`TLDR`:

1. script triggers js engine : `<script src="app.js"></script>`

2. memory in js is populated with the `document object` full of methods and properties that allow us to interact with DOM

3. Data is created and stored in JS : `let post = 'hi!'`

4. the output of calling querySelector is `an accessor object full of properties and methods that allow us to interact with the with the selected dom element` : `const jsdiv = document.querySelector('div')`

5. We use textContent(built-in property) to add data from JS to DOM element : `jsdiv.textContent = post`

6. DOM automatically display content on the page

```html
<script src="app.js"></script>
```

```js
// app.js

let post = 'Hey'
post = 'hi!'
console.log(post)
```

Let's access the DOM!

```html
<input />
<div></div>
<script src="app.js"></script>
```

⤵️

```c++
DOM - Model (representation) of the page
[
NODES :
 - input
 - div
 - script --> <App.js>
]
```

```js
let post = 'hi!'

const jsdiv = document.querySelector('div')

jsdiv.textContent = post

console.log(jsdiv)
```

1. html code gets loaded into the parser

2. three nodes are added to the DOM

3. Adding the `script node` triggers JS engine

4. define a variable post and assign to it the string 'hi'

5. define the constant jsdiv and assign it the result of calling the querySelector method which is on the document object passing to it the string 'div'

3 things happen when we do this:

- #1 : access the link to the dom list, the hidden property on the doc obj

- #2 : querySelector method is going to query(search) the first element in the list of type div

- #3 : Normally we would bring back that element in JS but because we cannot bring back in JS something that was written in C++, What really happens is querySelector is going to create an object in JS and that object is going to have an hidden link the div element in C++. This object is also going to be populated with a lot of functions and properties (like textConent) to interact with that div.

6. The output of jsdiv is stored in memory is an object (technically an accessor object) that has a lot of functions and properties to interact with the selected div element.

7. We access jsdiv object , especially the textContent property and set the textContent property of the div dom element to be the value of post.

`We know how (as developer) to use JS to create and save data/state and display it on the screen, next step is` :

### How to enable the user to add data on the page and use that data to re-update the DOM ?

`TLDR` : Thanks to `DOM events` and `event handlers`. Events are actions that a user take. Event handlers are functions that are triggered as a result of users actions and their goal is to change data in JS and therefore re-render the page.

```html
<input />
<div></div>
<script src="app.js"></script>
```

```js
let post = ''
const jsInput = document.querySelector('input')

const jsdiv = document.querySelector('div')

function handleInput() {
  post = jsInput.value // affect js
  jsDiv.textContent = post
}

jsInput.onInput = handleInput
```

1. html gets loaded into the parser

2. three nodes are added to the DOM(list)

3. Adding the `script node` triggers JS engine

4. defining the variable post and assign to it an empty string

5. defining the constant jsInput and assign to it the result of calling the querySelector method passing to it the string input. As a result, an accesor object is created with an hidden link to the input element on the DOM. This object is also full of getters and setters methods that allows us to interact with this DOM element such as `value`, `onInput`

6. defining the constant jsDiv and assign to it the result of calling the querySelector method passing in the string div. As a result, an accesor object is created with an hidden link to the first div element on the DOM. This object is also full of getters and setters methods that allows us to interact with the DOM element such as , `textContent`

7. defining a function called handleInput

8. Access the accessor object jsInput that has link to our input in C++, set the setter property `onInput` to be the function handleInput. As a result `handleInput` is set (technically a reference) to be the handler of the input element to handle the user input, such that anytime the user types something in the input that function will be call back into js and executed.

9. When the user type 'hi' in the input element, the value prop of input element is set to 'hi'.

10. the DOM API, the event API is going to trigger the function `handleInput` to be call back into js. The function goes into the cb queue and then is pushed onto the call stack. A brand new execution context is created.

11. As a result the DOM is updated with the new values from JS

12. The render engine re-render the page with new values

**Note**:
Every change of data is going to required a back and forth between C++ and JavaScript. There's no permanent bond data in JS memory and data in C++ memory.

Every single change is going to require a manual running of handler function (jsinput.onInput = handleInput) that's going to run code in JS to change the data in JS and a manual execution of a setter property to change data in C++ (jsDiv.textContent = post).
