# Data Binding in the UI

## How do we change our view based on multiple user interactions?

In the snippet below we have 2 types of interactions :

- User can change the input's value.
- User can click on input clear the input field

```html
<input />
<div></div>
<script src="app.js"></script>
```

```js
let post = ''
const jsdiv = document.querySelector('div')

const jsInput = document.querySelector('input')

jsInput.value = 'hi' //affect the value

function handleInput() {
  post = jsInput.value
  jsDiv.textContent = post //affect the view
}

function handleClick() {
  jsInput.value = '' // affect the view
}

jsInput.onInput = handleInput
jsInput.onClick = handleClick
```

### Code description

1. script triggers js engine : `<script src="app.js"></script>`

2. memory in js is populated with the `document object` full of methods and properties that allow us to interact with DOM

3. defined a variable post and assign to it an empty string

4. define the constant `jsdiv` and assigned it the result of calling the `querySelector` method. as a result, an accessor object is created, full of properties and methods to interact with the div node in the DOM.

5. defined the constant jsInput and assigned it the result of calling the querySelector method. As a result, an accessor object is created, full of properties and methods to interact with the input node in the DOM.

6. Access the jsInput object and set the `value` property to an the string 'hi'. As a result the DOM is updated and the input element shows 'hi'.

7. defined a function handleInput to handle user input.

8. defined a function handleClick hande user click.

9. Access the jsInput object acessor and set the `onInput` property to the function `handleInput`.

10. Access the jsInput object acessor and set the `onClick` property to the function `handleClick`.

### User action

1. When the user clicks on the input it triggers the handleClick function. The function is executed and as a result the input is cleared : `post = jsInput.value`

2. When the user types 'hi' in the input it triggers the handleInput function. The function is executed and as a result :

- data change in JS, the variable post is set to 'hi' : `post = jsInput.value`

- the view also changes. The page re-render because the DOM is updated : `jsDiv.textContent = post`

**Note**: The problem with this approach is that we re-rendering the page based on multiple interactions. What if we could have a single function to change the data and therefore change the view?

## The single function dataToView() - How do we restrict every change to view via an update of 'data' and a run of a signle function?

```html
<input />
<div></div>
<script src="app.js"></script>
```

```js
let post = undefined
const jsInput = document.querySelector('input')

const jsdiv = document.querySelector('div')

function dataToView() {
  //affect the view

  jsInput.value = post == undefined ? "what's up" : post
  jsDiv.textContent = post
}

function handleInput() {
  post = jsInput.value // update data
  dataToview() //convert data to view
}

function handleClick() {
  post = '' // update data
  dataToview() //convert data to view
}

jsInput.onInput = handleInput
jsInput.onClick = handleClick
dataToview()
```

### Code description - dataToView()

1. html gets loaded into the parser

2. three nodes are added to the DOM(list)

3. Adding the `script node` triggers JS engine and the document object is automatically available in global memory

4. defining the variable post and assign to it `undefined`

5. defining the constant jsInput and assign to it the result of calling the querySelector method passing to it the string input. As a result, an accesor object is created with an hidden link to the input element on the DOM. This object is also full of getters and setters methods that allows us to interact with this DOM element such as `value`, `onInput`

6. defining the constant jsDiv and assign to it the result of calling the querySelector method passing in the string div. As a result, an accesor object is created with an hidden link to the first div element on the DOM. This object is also full of getters and setters methods that allows us to interact with the DOM element such as , `textContent`

7. defining three functions `dataToView`, `handleInput`, `handleClick`

8. Access the accessor object jsInput that has link to our input in C++, set the setter property `onInput` to be the function handleInput. As a result, anytime the user types something in the input that function will be call back into js and executed.

9. Access the accessor object jsInput that has link to our input in C++, set the setter property `onClick` to be the function handleClick. As a result, anytime the user clicks in the input that function will be call back into js and executed.

10. function dataToview is executed. The job of this function is to change the view (via the DOM) based on data changes :

- Because post is undefined the jsInput.value will be set to 'What's up' `jsInput.value = post == undefined ? "what's up" : post`

- Also for the same reason, the text content of the div will be empty. `jsDiv.textContent = post`

### User action - dataToView()

1. When the user clicks on the input it triggers the handleClick function. The function is executed and as a result

- data change in JS, the variable post is set to empty string
- the function dataToView() is executed
- Because Post is no longer undefined but an empty string the input is cleared `jsInput.value = post == undefined ? "what's up" : post`
- The text content remains empty string

2. When the user types 'hi' in the input it triggers the handleInput function. The function is executed and as a result :

- data change in JS, the variable post is set to 'hi' : `post = jsInput.value`
- the function dataToView() is executed
- Because Post is no longer undefined but the text `hi` the value of the input DOM node is set to `hi`. `jsInput.value = post == undefined ? "what's up" : post`. The page re-renders.
- Also The text content of the div DOM node is set to `hi`. The page re-renders.
