# Virtual DOM

## UI components

```html
<script src="app.js"></script>
```

```js
let post = ''
let jsInput
let jsDiv

function render() {
  //affect the view
  jsInput = document.createElement('input')
  jsDiv = document.createElement('div')
  jsInput.value = post
  jsDiv.textContent = post
  jsInput.onInput = handleInput

  document.body.replaceChild(jsInput, jsDiv)
}

function handleInput() {
  post = jsInput.value // update data
}

setInterval(dataToview, 15)
```

- In the code snippet above rather than having our elements creation handled via HTML, the elements on the page are produced/created via a function called `render()`.

- With this approach (UI components), we give the user, the ability to add or remove elements on the page. We're explicitly making our view depends on data.

- On `line 12` we're using the body element to replace the elements on the page.

### Code description

1. a single node is added to the DOM(list)

2. Adding the `script node` triggers JS engine and the document object is automatically available in global memory

3. A place in the global memory is allocated for `post`, `jsInput` `jsDiv`, `render`, `handleInput`. post is assigned and empty string, jsInput and jsDIv are uninitialized.

4. setInterval is executed it set up an interval of 15ms in the browser and push datatoview in the callback queue

5. After 15 ms `render` is pushed onto the callstack. and then it runs. A new execution context is created

6. `jsInput` in global memory which was uninitialized is assigned a new value. It is an `accessor object` that contains a link to a newly created input DOM element and a lot of properties and methods to interact with that element. Same for `jsDiv`, but the element is just a div.

7. The value property on `jsInput` object is assigned the value of post, which is an empty string.

8. The textContent property of `jsDiv` is also assigned to the value of post.

9. We set up a new handler function for `jsInput`, `handleInput`. As a result, every time the user types something in the input field `handleInput` is going to be executed.

10. Finally, we attach `jsInput` and `jsDiv` to the body element. As a a result a link is created between the body element, input and div. The DOM is updated and therefore the UI too.

### User action

1. When a user types something it triggers the event handler `handleInput()`. The function is executed

2. `handleInput()` set the variable post to the value entered by user. Data change in JS.

3. `render()` runs after 15ms.

4. `jsInput` is going to be reassigned to a brand new `accessor object` that contains a link to a newly created unattached input DOM element and a lot of properties and methods to interact with that element. Same for `jsDiv`, but the element is just a div.

5. The value property on `jsInput` object is assigned the value of post, which is `hi`.

6. The textContent property of `jsDiv` is also assigned to the value of post.

7. We set up a new handler function for `jsInput`, `handleInput`. As a result, every time the user types something in the input field `handleInput` is going to be executed.

8. Finally, we attach `jsInput` and `jsDiv` to the body element. As a a result a link is created between the body element, input and div. The DOM is updated and therefore the UI too.

_What happens to the previous elements in the DOM attached to the body?_

They get garbage collected, to avoid memory leaks, meaning having elements that have no links in JS but are also, unaatached in the DOM.

**We are constantly recreating elements on the DOM anytime data/state is updated (user input etc..).**

### Could we emulate our HTML with semi-visual coding?

```html
<script src="app.js"></script>
```

```js
let name = 'jo'

const divInfo = ['div', `hi, ${name}!`]

function convert(node) {
  const element = document.createElement(node[0])
  element.textContent = node[1]
  return elem
}
const jsdiv = convert(divInfo)
```

### Code description - convert(node)

1. Document object is loaded into js. It has a link to the DOM.

2. A place in the global memory is allocated for `name`, `divInfo`, `convert` and `jsDiv`

3. `name` is assigned the string jo, `divInfo` is assigned an array with 2 items: the string div and the evaluated result of the template literal hi name, so `hi jo`

4. `jsDiv` is assigned the result of calling `convert` with `divInfo`

- the parameter node is assigned the argument `divInfo`

- a place in the local memory is allocated for a new constant `element`. `element` is assigned an accessor object that contains a link to a newly created div DOM element because node[0] evalutes to the first item in the array which is a `div`. `element` also contains and a lot of methods to interact with the div element.

- the `textContent` setter property is set to the value of second item in the array which is 'hi jo'

- the `element` object is returned from that function

- Nothing show up on the screen because the newly created div is unattached. Not attached to the body

### How to create a JS virtual DOM? - Blocks of code representing a visual of our view

- In the previous section we had a const `divInfo` that gave us a visual of our page

```js
const divInfo = ['div', `hi, ${name}!`]
```

- the function that takes in that array and produces a DOM element as an ouput `convert`

```js
function convert(node) {
  const element = document.createElement(node[0])
  element.textContent = node[1]
  return elem
}
```

- Translate to a `<div>hi name</div>`

Now we're going two functions :

- createVDOM() to create a visual of our view via an array
- convert() that takes in that array and produces a list of DOM elements

```html
<script src="app.js"></script>
```

```js
let name = ''
let jsInput
let jsDiv
let vDOM

function createVDOM() {
  return [
    ['input', name, handle],
    ['div', `hello ${name}!`],
  ]
}
function handleInput() {
  name = jsInput.value
} //change data in JS

function updateVDOM() {
  vdom = createVDOM()

  jsInput = convert(vDOM[0]) // new unattached dom element

  jsDiv = convert(vDOM[1]) // new unattached dom element
  document.body.replaceChildren(jsInput, jsDiv) // attach dom elements to the body
}

function convert(node) {
  const element = document.createElement(node[0])
  element.textContent = node[1]
  element.value = node[1]
  element.oninput = node[2]
  return elem
}

setInterval(updateVDOM, 15)
```

### Code description -

1. Document object is loaded into js. It has a hidden link to the DOM

2. a place in the global memory is allocated for name, jsInput, jsDiv,vDOM, createVDOM, handleInput, updateVDOM and convert

3. jsInput, jsDiv,vDOM are uninitialized and name is assigned an empty string.

4. setInterval is executed. A new interval of 15ms is setup in the browser and updateVDOM is push into the callback queue.

5. after 15ms updateVDOM is pushed onto the callstack, it runs, a new execution context is created :

- vDOM in the global memory which was uninitialized is assigned the result of calling createVDOM. A new execution context context is created, and we go into createVDOM(). createVDOM() returns a two dimensional array . The array is assigned to VDOM, createVDOM() gets popped off the callstack. `vDOM` = `[ ['input', name, handle],['div','Hello,'] ]`

- We return into updateVDOM execution context, `jsInput` is assigned the result of calling convert with the item at position 0 in the vDOM array which is an array with 3 items `['input', name, handle]`. `jsInput` = `convert(['input', name, handle])`

- a new execution context is created, the param node is assigned the argument `['input', name, handle]`, a place in the local memory is allocated to a new constant `element`.

- `element` is assigned an accessor object which contains a link to newly created `input` DOM element and lots of methods and property to interact with input DOM element : `element` = `{input, onInput, value, ...}`

- `element` value property is assigned to the element at position 1 in the node array : `element.value` = `''`

- `element` onInput property is assigned to the element at position 2 in the node array : `element.value` = `handleInput`

- We return `element`. The object in JS translates to an unattached `<input>` element in the DOM.

- We return into UpdateVDOM and we do the same jsDIV

- Finally we attach to the `<body>` the newly created DOM elements `<input>` and `<div>`. The DOM is updated and therefore the UI is also updated

### User action -

1. When the user types something in the input element the DOM element value is updated, and `handleInput` runs and reassign the variable `name` in JS : `name = 'Hi'`

2. 15ms after, `updateDOM` re-runs:

- the variable vDOM that was assigned to a two dimensional array is reassigned a new two dimensional array :

-> `previousvDOM` = `[ ['input', name, handle],['div','Hello, '] ]`

-> `currentvDOM` = `[ ['input', name, handle], ['div','Hello hi'] ]` : Visual representation of page

the only difference is the `div` text content which now evaluates to `hello hi`

> In future sections, instead of deleting `previousDOM`, we're going to reuse the old array and compare it to the new one so that we can only update the DOM based on what elements changed.

- **it recreates a new input and a new div element**, the previous elements get garbage collected, the ui is updated with the user values

### How to create a virtual DOM?

1. Block of code representing each piece of the view :

- Array with all the details : `['input', name, handle],['div',`hello ${name}!`]`
- Function that takes that array and produces a `DOM element` as output :

```js
function convert(node) {
  const element = document.createElement(node[0])
  element.textContent = node[1]
  element.value = node[1]
  element.oninput = node[2]
  return elem
}
```
