# Composition and functional components

- Our js Code mirrors the ouput of the DOM
- We can use reusable functions to create JS (V) DOM elements each with specific data
- We're going to map over the vDOM array and create a new DOM element

```html
<script src="app.js"></script>
```

```js
let name = ''
let elems
let vDOM

function createVDOM() {
  return [
    ['input', name, handle],
    ['div', `hello ${name}!`],
    ['div', `great job!`],
  ]
}
function handleInput(e) {
  name = e.target.value
} //change data in JS

function updateVDOM() {
  vdom = createVDOM()

  elems = vdom.map(convert)

  document.element.replaceChildren(...elems)
}

function convert(node) {
  const element = document.createElement(node[0])
  element.textContent = node[1]
  element.value = node[1]
  element.oninput = node[2]
  return elem
}

setInterval(updateDOM, 15)
```

## Code description

1. When updateDOM() runs, a new execution context is created :

- vDOM in the global memory which was uninitialized is assigned the result of calling createVDOM. A new execution context context is created. createVDOM() returns a three dimensional array .

- The array is assigned to VDOM, createVDOM() gets popped off the callstack.
  `vDOM` =
  `[
['input', name, handle],
['div','Hello,'],
['div',`great job!`]
  ]
  `

- `elems` in the global memory which was uninitialized is assigned the result of calling `map` on `vDOM`. `map` takes in the convert function. the output is going to be an array with 3 objects for the corresponding DOM elements.

- By invoking `replaceChildren` and passing in spread elems, we're attaching to DOM `<body>` node three nodes `<input>`, `<div>`, and `<div>`

- The UI is updated

## User action

Because, We're no longer getting individual labels for our accessor objects :

`before`

```js
jsInput = { input, onInput, handleInput }
```

`after`

```js
elems = [
  { input, onInput, handleInput },
  { div, textContent },
]
```

we spreading them into the replaceChildren function, in the handler function we used the `event object` (an object full of information about the user actions) to access the value of the input element.

1. When the user types `hi` in the input element, handleInput is going to be triggered in JS and the variable name will be reassigned to the value of the input element. Our data in JS is updated.

2. When updateDOM() re-runs

- vDOM in the global memory assigned to this three dimensional array :
  -> `previous vDOM` `vDOM` =
  `[
['input', name, handle],
['div','Hello,'],
['div',`great job!`]
  ]

is now assigned to this array :

-> `current vDOM` `vDOM` =
`[
['input', name, handle],
['div','Hello, hi'],
['div',`great job!`]
]

- `elems` in the global memory also a new value: an array with 3 objects for the corresponding DOM elements

- By invoking `replaceChildren` and passing in spread elems, we're attaching to DOM `<body>` node three new nodes `<input>`, `<div>`, and `<div>`

- The UI is updated
