# What is the GitHub Community?

GitHub on its own is starting to become a kind of internet community of its own, almost like a social media site for software engineers. Displaying and sharing code is easy. Users can create profiles to save interesting codebases, follow other users, and host their code. We’ll discuss how to round out a GitHub profile and how to be engaged in all that the community has to offer!

## Github Profiles

With GitHub profiles, users can follow other users and see what they work on in their careers. A well-rounded GitHub profile will not only look good to recruiters but boost reputability when we want to make contributions to open source projects.

A good GitHub profile will have several different projects, ideally with different concepts driving each project. Each project should have a well-written `README` document. This shows that the user can communicate their work with other developers through good code documentation.

## Exploring Code on GitHub

A great way to find inspiration for your projects is to use GitHub’s search feature. You can search for specific companies, developers, and even projects. For instance, you can easily search for projects relating to a Discord chatbot and then choose the target language, like C#. If you want to contribute to a Discord bot built-in C# or grab some code to get yourself started on a chatbot, you can!

Another great place to look for projects pertaining to certain topics is the [GitHub Topics page](https://github.com/topics). Here, projects are grouped by topics like Arduino projects and algorithms.

Even if you don’t know what to look for, [GitHub Explore](https://github.com/explore) will use existing projects in your GitHub profile to automatically find other projects you might be interested in. And, to see what other developers are currently interested in, you can check out [what’s trending](https://github.com/trending) in the GitHub community!

## Open Source Projects On GitHub

Open source projects have their code open to the public and usually take code submissions from the developer community. For instance, NASA, Facebook, and Google all use GitHub for open-source projects. That means developers outside of those organizations volunteer to help with bug fixes and experiment on new features.

While a company or developer might not want all of their projects to be open source, many big companies maintain open-source projects to stay in touch with the wider developer community and generate user interest. Google has many repositories where the broader community collaborates:

Another example is Facebook has a repository named [Folly](https://github.com/facebook/folly) which is used internally and has over 10,000 commits from developers from all over the world. That means that anyone who has made a commit to Folly can technically say they’ve helped add on to a project being used by Facebook.

Making contributions to open-source projects is a great way to grow your skill and experience. To contribute, you can start at any repository’s issues page, where bugs and potential new features are listed. Then, you can fork the repository to work on a specific issue and eventually make a pull request.

You can take a look at these [current open discussions](https://github.com/facebook/folly/issues) in the Folly repository.

Now that you know more about the GitHub community, feel free to start building up your profile by creating your own projects! You can also start exploring GitHub for other projects that you can fork or star. As you gain more experience, start looking at issues in projects and start fixing them!
