# Components Interacting

_TLDR_ :

- A React application can contain multiple components.
- Components can interact with each other by returning instances of each other.
- Components interacting allows them to be broken into smaller components, stored into separate files, and reused when necessary.

- Pass, access, and display props.
- Use props to create conditional statements.
- Define event handlers in a component and pass them to other components.
- Work with a component’s children.
- Assign default values to props.

_GOALS_:

- be familiar with how components can reference other components.
- be familiar with how this allows us to separate our components into separate files

## Intro

A React application can contain dozens, or even hundreds, of components.

Each component might be small and relatively unremarkable on its own. When combined, however, they can form enormous, fantastically complex ecosystems of information.

In other words, React apps are made out of components, but what makes React special isn’t the components themselves. What makes React special is the ways in which components _interact_.

## COMPONENTS RENDER OTHER COMPONENTS

### Returning Another Component

So far, we’ve explored components that return JSX elements, such as:

```jsx
function PurchaseButton() {
  return (
    <button
      onClick={() => {
        alert('Purchase Complete')
      }}>
      Purchase
    </button>
  )
}
```

In this example, the React component is not interacting with other components. However, you can have components interact with each other by _passing information_ or even _returning other components_.

```jsx
function PurchaseButton() {
  return (
    <button
      onClick={() => {
        alert('Purchase Complete')
      }}>
      Purchase
    </button>
  )
}

function ItemBox() {
  return (
    <div>
      <h1>50% Sale</h1>
      <h2>Item: Small Shirt</h2>
      <PurchaseButton />
    </div>
  )
}
```

In the above example, `ItemBox` returns an instance of `PurchaseButton`. This is an example of how a component can reference other components!

### Apply a Component in a Render Function

```jsx
import Button from './Button'

function App() {
  return <Button />
}

export default App
```

This ability allows us to separate components into smaller functions and connect them together to make more complex components!

We can treat it as the Button component is a child of the parent App component. By breaking a component into extracted smaller components, we can reuse the individual parts when necessary.

## Props

We saw one way components interact by returning another compoment.

Another way component can interact is by passing information to another component.

Information that gets passed from one component to another is known as `props`.

Props can be used to customize the output of each component depending on the information that is passed in.

By allowing components to communicate with each other, we can add a level of flexibility that was not possible before.

### Access a Component's props

A component’s props is an object. It holds information about that component.

Let’s take a look at the HTML button tag. There are several pieces of information we can pass to the button tag, such as the type of the button.

```html
<button type="submit" value="Submit">Submit</button>
```

In this example, we’ve passed two pieces of information to the button tag, a type and a value. Depending on what type attribute we give to the `<button>` element, it will treat the form differently. `In the same way, we can pass information to our own components to specify how they behave`!

`Props serve the same purpose for components as arguments do for functions.`

To access a component’s props object, you can reference the props object and the dot notation for its properties. Here’s an example:

```js
props.name
```

### Pass `props` to a Component

How do we pass props? By giving the component an attribute:

```jsx
<Greeting name="Jamy" />
```

Let’s say that you want to pass a component the message, "We're great!". Here’s how you can do it

```jsx
<SloganDisplay message="We're great!" />
```

As you can see, to pass information to a component, you need a `name` for the information that you want to pass.

In the above example, we used the name `message`.

If you want to pass information that isn’t a string, then `wrap that information in curly braces`. Here’s how you would pass an array:

```jsx
<Greeting myInfo={['Astronaut', 'Narek', '43']} />
```

We can pass several pieces of information to `<Greeting />`

```jsx
<Greeting
  name="The Queen Mary"
  city="Long Beach, California"
  age={56}
  haunted={true}
/>
```

### Render a Component's props

You will often want a component to display the information that you pass.

To make sure that a function component can use the props object, `define your function component with props as the parameter`:

```jsx
function Button(props) {
  return <button>{props.displayText}</button>
}
```

In the example, props is accepted as a parameter, and the object values are accessed with the dot notation
Alternatively, since props is an object, you can also use destructuring syntax like so:

```jsx
function Button({ displayText }) {
  return <button>{displayText}</button>
}
```

### Pass props From Component To Component

We know how to pass a prop to a component:

```jsx
<Greeting firstName="Esmerelda" />
```

We also know how to access and display a passed-in prop:

```jsx
return <h1>{props.firstName}</h1>
```

The most common use of props is to pass information to a component from a different component.

Props in React travel in a _one-way direction_, from the top to bottom, parent to child.

```jsx
function App() {
  return <Product name="Apple Watch" price={399} rating="4.5/5.0" />
}
```

In this example, App is the parent and Product is the child. App passes three props to Product (name, price, and rating), which can then be read inside the child component.

`Props passed down are immutable`, meaning they cannot be changed. `If a component wants new values for its props, it needs to rely on the parent component` to pass it new ones.

### Render Different UI Based on props

We can do more with props than just display them. You can also use props to make decisions :

```jsx
function LoginMsg(props) {
  if (props.password === 'a-tough-password') {
    return <h2>Sign In Successful.</h2>
  } else {
    return <h2>Sign In Failed..</h2>
  }
}
```

In this example, we use the props passed in to make a decision rather than rendering the value to the screen.

- If the password received is equal to 'a-tough-password', the resulting message in `<h2></h2>` will be different!

The passed-in password is not displayed in either case! The prop is used to decide what will be displayed.

This is a common technique.

Another example :

```jsx
function Greeting(props) {
  if (props.signedIn == false) {
    return <h1>Please login.</h1>
  } else {
    return (
      <>
        <h1>Welcome back, {props.name}!</h1>
        <article>Latest Movie: A Computer Bug's Life</article>
      </>
    )
  }
}
```

### Put an Event Handler in a Function Component

You can, and often will, pass _functions as props_. It is especially common to pass event handler functions.

```js
import React from 'react'

function Example() {
  function handleEvent() {
    alert(`I am an event handler.
      If you see this message,
      then I have been called.`)
  }
  return <h1 onClick={handleEvent}>Hello world</h1>
}
```

### handleEvent, onEvent, and props.onEvent

When you pass an event handler as a prop, there are two names that you have to choose. Both naming choices occur in the parent component, the component that defines the event handler and passes it.

- The first name that you have to choose is the `name of the event handler` itself.

```jsx
function handleEvent() {
  alert(`I am an event handler.
      If you see this message,
      then I have been called.`)
}
```

- The second name that you have to choose is the `name of the prop` that you will use to pass the event handler. This is the same thing as the attribute name.

```jsx
return <Button talk />
```

These two names can be _whatever we want_. However, there is a _naming convention_ that is commonly used.

Here’s how the naming convention works:

1. first, think about what _type of event_ you are listening for. In our example, the event type was `“click”`. If you are listening for a `“click”` event, then you name your event handler `handleClick`. If you are listening for a `“hover”` event, then you name your event handler `handleHover`

2. Your prop name should be the word `on`, plus your _event type_. If you are listening for a `“click”`event, then you name your prop `onClick`. If you are listening for a `“hover”` event, then you name your prop `onHover`

### props.children

Every `component’s props object` has a property named `children`.

props.children will return everything in between a component’s opening and closing JSX tags.

So far, all of the components that we’ve seen have been self-closing tags, such as `<MyFunctionComponent />`. They don’t have to be! You could write `<MyFunctionComponent></MyFunctionComponent>`, and it would still work.

props.children would return everything in between `<MyFunctionComponent>` and `</MyFunctionComponent>`

```jsx
// Example 1
<BigButton>
  I am a child of BigButton.
</BigButton>


// Example 2
<BigButton>
  <LilButton />
</BigButton>


// Example 3
<BigButton />
```

In the code above :

- In Example 1, `<BigButton>`‘s props.children would equal the text, “I am a child of BigButton.”

- In Example 2, `<BigButton>`‘s props.children would equal a `<LilButton />` component.

- In Example 3, `<BigButton>‘`s props.children would equal undefined

If a component has more than one child between its JSX tags, then props.children will return those children in an _array_.

### Giving Default Values to props

```jsx
import React from 'react'

function Button(props) {
  return <button></button>
}

export default Button
```

Take a look at the Button component. Notice that, Button expects to receive a prop named text. The received text will be displayed inside of a`<button>`element.

What if nobody passes any text to Button?

If nobody passes any `text` to `Button`, then Button‘s display will be blank. It would be better if Button could display a default message instead.

There are three ways to do this!

- The first method is adding a defaultProps static property to the component:

```jsx
function Example(props) {
  return <h1>{props.text}</h1>
}

Example.defaultProps = {
  text: 'This is default text',
}
```

- You can also specify the default value directly in the function definition:

```jsx
function Example({ text = 'This is default text' }) {
  return <h1>{text}</h1>
}
```

- Lastly, you can also set the default value in the function body:

```jsx
function Example(props) {
  const { text = 'This is default text' } = props
  return <h1>{text}</h1>
}
```
