# Props

When thinking in the frame of a React application, components are small pieces of a whole. Together, they make up the interface that users will see.

With each component playing a role in the interface, there are times when components must be able to communicate with other components

One way component can interact is by passing information to another component.

Information that gets passed from one component to another is known as `props`.

Props can be used to customize the output of each component depending on the information that is passed in.

By allowing components to communicate with each other, we can add a level of flexibility that was not possible before.

## Learning goals

- Pass, access, and display props.
- Use props to create conditional statements.
- Define event handlers in a component and pass them to other components.
- Work with a component’s children.
- Assign default values to props.

## Access a Component's props

A component’s props is an object. It holds information about that component.

Let’s take a look at the HTML button tag. There are several pieces of information we can pass to the button tag, such as the type of the button.

```html
<button type="submit" value="Submit">Submit</button>
```

In this example, we’ve passed two pieces of information to the button tag, a type and a value. Depending on what type attribute we give to the `<button>` element, it will treat the form differently. `In the same way, we can pass information to our own components to specify how they behave`!

`Props serve the same purpose for components as arguments do for functions.`

To access a component’s props object, you can reference the props object and the dot notation for its properties. Here’s an example:

```js
props.name
```

## Pass `props` to a Component

How do we pass props? By giving the component an attribute:

```jsx
<Greeting name="Jamy" />
```

Let’s say that you want to pass a component the message, "We're great!". Here’s how you can do it

```jsx
<SloganDisplay message="We're great!" />
```

As you can see, to pass information to a component, you need a `name` for the information that you want to pass.

In the above example, we used the name `message`.

If you want to pass information that isn’t a string, then `wrap that information in curly braces`. Here’s how you would pass an array:

```jsx
<Greeting myInfo={['Astronaut', 'Narek', '43']} />
```

We can pass several pieces of information to `<Greeting />`

```jsx
<Greeting
  name="The Queen Mary"
  city="Long Beach, California"
  age={56}
  haunted={true}
/>
```

## Render a Component's props

You will often want a component to display the information that you pass.

To make sure that a function component can use the props object, `define your function component with props as the parameter`:

```jsx
function Button(props) {
  return <button>{props.displayText}</button>
}
```

In the example, props is accepted as a parameter, and the object values are accessed with the dot notation
Alternatively, since props is an object, you can also use destructuring syntax like so:

```jsx
function Button({ displayText }) {
  return <button>{displayText}</button>
}
```

## Pass props From Component To Component

We know how to pass a prop to a component:

```jsx
<Greeting firstName="Esmerelda" />
```

We also know how to access and display a passed-in prop:

```jsx
return <h1>{props.firstName}</h1>
```

The most common use of props is to pass information to a component from a different component.

Props in React travel in a one-way direction, from the top to bottom, parent to child.

```jsx
function App() {
  return <Product name="Apple Watch" price={399} rating="4.5/5.0" />
}
```

In this example, App is the parent and Product is the child. App passes three props to Product (name, price, and rating), which can then be read inside the child component.

`Props passed down are immutable`, meaning they cannot be changed. `If a component wants new values for its props, it needs to rely on the parent component` to pass it new ones.

## Render Different UI Based on props

We can do more with props than just display them. You can also use props to make decisions :

```jsx
function LoginMsg(props) {
  if (props.password === 'a-tough-password') {
    return <h2>Sign In Successful.</h2>
  } else {
    return <h2>Sign In Failed..</h2>
  }
}
```

In this example, we use the props passed in to make a decision rather than rendering the value to the screen.

- If the password received is equal to 'a-tough-password', the resulting message in `<h2></h2>` will be different!

The passed-in password is not displayed in either case! The prop is used to decide what will be displayed.

This is a common technique.

Another example :

```jsx
function Greeting(props) {
  if (props.signedIn == false) {
    return <h1>Please login.</h1>
  } else {
    return (
      <>
        <h1>Welcome back, {props.name}!</h1>
        <article>Latest Movie: A Computer Bug's Life</article>
      </>
    )
  }
}
```
