# BROWSER COMPATIBILITY AND TRANSPILATION

## Introduction

_The problem_ :

A website sends its code to a browser to be interpreted and run. People use different browser applications, each running a particular version, depending on when it was last updated.

As new features get added to JavaScript, browsers need to update to recognize and interpret those features. When a browser isn’t updated, it won’t see new syntax as valid JavaScript code. Users with outdated browsers can see a completely different (and likely broken) version of your site!

Can we make our site work for everyone, even those who forgot to update their browser for the last decade? Should we write our JavaScript using only the oldest syntax?

_The solution_ :

_Transpilation_ is a way to solve it. Tool like _Babel_ ,automatically translate our fancy modern JavaScript into something that even an ancient browser could understand!

## Browser Compatibility and Modern JavaScript Syntax

What JavaScript syntax is new? What is safe to use for any browser? How do we find this out?

These questions all have to do with browser compatibility, the idea that the browsers have to update to use the latest JavaScript features, some browsers haven’t done so yet, and some users haven’t updated their browser to the latest version. When we design a site for browser compatibility, we design our site to work correctly for as many different browsers and browser versions as possible. When thinking about browser compatibility, it is helpful to have a resource that will tell us which language features are supported by which browser versions.

Tools such as [caniuse.com](https://caniuse.com/) provide helpful browser compatibility information. On that site, you can search for language features and see:

- The browser versions that support those features
- Which browser versions don’t support those features
- What percentage of internet users are using these versions

## Introduction to Transpilation

The newer features of JavaScript tend to make it easier to do things rather than add new features, a concept known as _syntactic sugar_. We can use older syntax to do the same things but it’s usually harder to write.

For example, ES6 added _string interpolation_, allowing variables and expressions to be incorporated into string content :

```js
;`You can make carbonara with ${pasta}, ${meat}, and a sauce made with ${sauce}.`
```

The above line can be easily converted to the old syntax by using concatenation instead:

```js
'You can make carbonara with ' +
  pasta +
  ',' +
  meat +
  ', and a sauce made with ' +
  sauce +
  '.'
```

While _compilation_ translates code from one language to another, _transpilation_ is a term for translating code to different formats of the same language. We can use a _transpiler_ to convert our modern code into a more compatible version.

Before we publish our code online, we take our source code and transpile it. This produces a set of output files that use more browser-compatible syntax. We publish the output files to our web server and can continue to develop our source code with any modern features we want to write!

## Babel configuration

- Babel is a Node package, so we would begin by initializing our npm project using `npm init -y`. This would set us up with a **package.json** file.

- Next, we would want to install `@babel/cli` and `@babel/preset-env` as devDependencies using `npm install --save-dev`. `@babel/cli` provides the main babel functionality as well as the command line interface. `@babel/preset-env` is a standard way of configuring Babel to transpile all of the common ES6 features, instead of having to list them one by one.

- Babel is configured using a file named `.babelrc.` With `@babel/preset-env`, the content of this file is simple

```json
// babelrc
{
  "presets": ["@babel/preset-env"]
}
```

The .babelrc file is saying to use the `@babel/preset-env` configuration. This will transpile the latest adopted JavaScript features into code supported by older browsers.

- Next, we want to _define_ the command we will use to run Babel on our project. We will do this by defining a `build` command in the scripts section of our **package.json**:

```json
// babelrc
{
  "scripts": {
    "build": "babel src -d out"
  }
}
```

This is using the babel command (`from @babel/cli`) with the first argument `src` specifying where the code we want to run babel on. Then we provide the `-d` flag to specify where we want Babel to store the output, in this case, the **out** folder.

- With the command defined, we can run Babel using the build command:

```bash
npm run build
```

## Targeting Different Browsers

`babel-preset-env` allows us to provide a list of browsers we want to be supported using a file named **.browserslistrc**.

Within this file there are many ways in which we can specify our target list of browsers. A good default configuration, which covers most of the browsers a developer could expect users to be on, can be specified with:

```js
defaults
```

However, we can also customize this list. For example, we could make sure that our project is supported by the last two versions of Internet Explorer with:

```js
last 2 Explorer versions

```

Or maybe you want to make sure your application supports 99.5% of the users of the internet:

```js
cover 99.5%
```

The [browserslist documentation](https://github.com/browserslist/browserslist) provides additional syntax and examples for configuring **.browserslist**.

After defining **.browserslist**, you can list all browsers supported by your **.browserlist** file using the following command:

```js
npx browserslist
```
