#

## Comparison of Build Tools

Which build tool is right for your project — [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/), [Parcel](https://parceljs.org/), [esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/), or [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) ?

### Webpack

[Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) is a popular bundler with a rich feature set that is able to be configured for a wide variety of Javascript Applications.

Main distinguishing features :

- `Custom configuration` : We can customize the various build settings of our Webpack application, including settings and properties for custom plugins, servers, caching, and modules. Webpack’s built-in custom configuration capabilities enable developers to build a wide range of complex applications, small and large, with few limitations.

- `Support for a variety of module types and languages` : Webpack conveniently supports many module types, including [ECMAScript](https://tc39.es/ecma262/multipage/ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules.html#sec-ecmascript-language-scripts-and-modules), [CommonJS](http://www.commonjs.org/specs/modules/1.0/), and [AMD](https://github.com/amdjs/amdjs-api/blob/master/AMD.md) modules, whereas other build tools like `Vite` only support ES modules.Moreover, Webpack uses loaders to support a number of non-native (non-JavaScript) modular programming languages, such as [CoffeeScript](http://coffeescript.org/), [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/), [Babel](https://babeljs.io/), [LESS](https://lesscss.org/), and [Sass](https://sass-lang.com/). Loaders are responsible for transforming a module’s non-native files into familiar assets like JavaScript and CSS and “load” these files so that your application can use them. Webpack even allows you to [write your own custom loader](https://webpack.js.org/contribute/writing-a-loader/)..

### Parcel

[Parcel](https://parceljs.org/) is a bundler designed to need no configuration, making it easy to install and use right away.

Main distinguishing features :

- `Zero configuration` : Parcel stands out from other build tools mainly because of its ability to set up and run projects with very little configuration. Here are some features Parcel supports without the need for any configuration:
  - Code-splitting with no entry point configuration
  - Built-in bundling for HTML, CSS, and JavaScript
  - Live reloading via Hot Module Replacement (HMR)

In addition, [Parcel](https://parceljs.org/) is similar to Webpack in that it provides out-of-the-box support for many different kinds of frameworks, including Typescript, Vue.js, SCSS, and GraphQL.

### esbuild

[esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/) is a JavaScript bundler that is designed to be fast. It supports loading [some file types](https://esbuild.github.io/content-types/) without additional installations.

- `Extremely fast bundling` : esbuild is known for its fast bundling times, with the ability to bundle approximately 10 to 100 times faster than similar build tools. Many build tools like Webpack, Parcel, and Vite speed up bundling by using caches. esbuild can execute bundling at impressive speeds without using caches, meaning fewer configurations and a more efficient development process.

### Vite

[Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) is a build tool that uses [Rollup](https://rollupjs.org/guide/en/) for bundling and provides a development server that supports ES module imports and exports.

Main distinguishing feature :

- `Dev server`: Vite differentiates itself from its competitors with its efficient and fully-embedded dev server. Vite _uses esbuild_ behind-the-scenes to pre-bundle dependencies in the browser to reduce dev server start times and _ensure module compatibility_ by converting CommonJS and UMD modules into native ESM. As a result, the dev server is optimized and significantly improves Hot Module Reloading (HMR) update speed and page loading performance.

### So, which build tool should I use for my project?

- [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/)

[Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) is ideal for `more complex projects` that use a variety of `non-JavaScript assets` or require a good amount of `custom configuration`. If your application uses a lot of stylesheets, fonts, and images, and requires special configuration for entry points and servers, then Webpack is the way to go!

- [Parcel](https://parceljs.org/)

[Parcel](https://parceljs.org/) is ideal for projects that require some support for a variety of dependencies and frameworks without the need for advanced configurations since Parcel’s strength lies in its ability to build projects with little work on the developer’s end. Parcel is great for quickly building small prototypes that run with minimal configuration.

- [esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/)

[esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/)’s extremely fast bundling makes it easy to quickly build projects that don’t require extra configuration, dependencies, and plugins. esbuild is also optimal for simpler applications because of its lack of support for many common out-of-the-box features such as plugins, front-end languages, and HMR.

- [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/)

[Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) is ideal for projects that utilize the dev server and different frameworks without needing too much additional configuration. Moreover, Vite scales well for any size application, whether it is a single webpage or a complex web application with many components. Since Vite only updates modules on-demand, live reloading times will remain optimized no matter the application size. However, keep in mind that Vite only supports ES modules

## Building Apps with esbuild

Written in [Go](https://golang.org/), esbuild is capable of bundling files at lightning speed.

You can follow along with your own project or download this [simple React app for a photo carousel](https://github.com/hermkan/photo-carousel-esbuild/archive/refs/heads/main.zip)

Let’s get started!

### Project Setup

[esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/) like [Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/), is a Node package. If your project is not a Node.js project, remember that you can initialize it using:

```bash
npm init -y
```

If you are following along using the provided React app, the project is already a Node.js project. But you will need to install dependencies via:

```bash
npm install
```

Next, we will need to install [esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/). We can do this using npm like below:

```bash
npm install esbuild
```

### The Build Command

Let’s add a build command in the scripts section of **package.json**. Similar to Webpack, esbuild requires an entry point and an exit point. However, since there is no default entry and exit point, we must explicitly state these in our build command.

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "build": "esbuild ./src/app.js --bundle --outdir=./public"
  }
}
```

In the code block above, the esbuild command runs with the entry point at **./app.js** to bundle the app with the exit point at **./public**. The `--bundle` flag needs to be explicitly stated as esbuild does not bundle files by default. Exit points can be set using either the `--outdir` flag to provide a directory for output files `(--outdir=./public)` or the `--outfile` flag to specify the name of a single output file `(--outfile=./public/out.js)`.

### Loaders

Like with Webpack, we can define rules to process various file types in our web app. esbuild supports loading several file types without the need for external loaders that require additional installations. These include TypeScript, JSX, CSS, and images.

While Webpack loaders are defined via rules in its `config` file, esbuild specifies its `loaders` via the `--loader` flag in the `build` command. The example command below defines a rule for .ext files to use loadername loader.

```
{
 "esbuild ./app.js --bundle --loader:.ext=loadername --outdir=./public"
}
```

### JSX

If you've ran the `build` command with `npm run build`, the current `build` script throws an error because our **app.js** contains JSX.

We could either change the file extension of **app.js** and **Carousel.js** to use **.jsx** extensions, or define a rule to use a JSX loader. We do this by adding a `--loader` flag to our `build` command in **package.json**.

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "build": "esbuild ./src/app.js --bundle --loader:.js=jsx --outdir=./public"
  }
}
```

Here we’ve set our `--loader` flag to use the jsx loader for files with the **.js extention**. Now JSX syntax will be enabled in our JavaScript files.

### Images

If you are following along with our photo carousel React app, when you try to run the build command again you will notice another error saying that there is no loader configured for **.jpg** files.

```bash
 > src/app.js:7:18: error: No loader is configured for ".jpg" files: src/assets/ocean.jpg
    7 │ import ocean from './assets/ocean.jpg';
      ╵                   ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

This error is triggered by import statements for image files in **app.js**.

One way to import images is as external files. To do this, we will need to add a `--loader` flag to our `build` command in **package.json**.

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "build": "esbuild ./src/app.js --bundle --loader:.js=jsx --loader:.jpg=file --outdir=./public"
  }
}
```

Now our **.jpg** images will be exported into the output directory

When we try to run the `build` command after adding a loader for **.jpg** files, you will get another error since the web app also uses an **.svg** image.

```bash
 > src/Carousel.js:2:16: error: No loader is configured for ".svg" files: src/sun.svg
    2 │ import sun from './sun.svg';
      ╵                 ~~~~~~~~~~~
```

We can bundle images with **.svg** extension, as a [Base64-encoded data URL](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Basics_of_HTTP/Data_URIs). Importing an image as a data URL can be more efficient as the image gets embedded into our JavaScript code. This means that there is one less browser request and faster load time! To do this, we will need to add another `--loader` flag to our `build` command in **package.json**.

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "build": "esbuild ./src/app.js --bundle --loader:.js=jsx --loader:.jpg=file --loader:.svg=dataurl --outdir=./public"
  }
}
```

Now we’ve set our `--loader` flag to use the `dataurl` loader for files with the **.svg** extention. Our **.svg** files will now be converted as data URLs and embedded into our bundle.

### CSS

When CSS files are imported directly in JavaScript with the `import` statement, esbuild will automatically _gather_ all referenced CSS files and bundle them into a _single_ CSS file at the exit point.

We import **Carousel.css** in **Carousel.js** like below:

```js
import './Carousel.css'
```

esbuild doesn’t need any loaders specified in order to automatically bundle CSS file at the exit point at **./public**.

### Putting It All Together

Now that we’ve set up our loaders, running the build command should generate two files in **./public:** **app.js** and **app.css**. Notice that these files have been linked in **./public/index.html**. You can view the app by opening the **index.html** file in any web browser as esbuild doesn’t have its own _dev server_.

Our React app has been converted into static files that can be hosted without Node.js packages!

## Building Apps with Parcel

[Parcel](https://parceljs.org/) is a bundler designed to need no configuration, making it easy to install and use right away.

You can follow along with your own project or download this [simple React app for a photo carousel](https://github.com/hermkan/photo-carousel-parcel/archive/refs/heads/main.zip).

Let’s get started!

### Installing Parcel

Parcel, like Webpack, is a Node package. If your project is not a Node.js project, remember that you can initialize Node.js using:

```bash
npm init -y
```

If you are following along using the provided React app, the project is already a Node.js project. But you will need to install dependencies via:

```bash
npm install
```

Next, we will need to install [Parcel](https://parceljs.org/). We can do this using npm like below:

```bash
npm install parcel

```

You should now see Parcel listed under the `dependencies` section in your package.json file like below:

```json
"parcel": "^2.0.0-rc.0"

```

### The Serve and Build Commands

Let’s add our `start` and `build` commands in the scripts section of **package.json**. The `start` command starts up Parcel’s built-in dev server and the `build` command bundles your app for production.

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "start": "parcel src/index.html",
    "build": "parcel build src/index.html --public-url ./"
  }
}
```

In the code block above, the `start` command bundles and runs our app at the entry point **src/index.html,**, with the bundled assets served from **./dist**. Likewise, the `build` command runs with the same entry point at **src/index.html,**.

If your website files are hosted somewhere other than the root folder (/), the build command will require an additional `--public-url` flag to specify that file path. In the example above, `./` specifies that the site will be served from the working directory, in our case, the **./dist folder**, which Parcel automatically generates when you run the build command.

Remember that you can run the `build` and `start` commands with `npm run build`.

A convenient feature of Parcel’s built-in dev server is [hot reloading](https://parceljs.org/features/development/#hot-reloading). When you run `npm run start`, you will see the following message:

```bash
Server running at http://localhost:1234

```

Try navigating to `http://localhost:1234` on your browser and making a small change to your app (like the font size of a heading). You’ll see that Parcel automatically re-bundles and updates your app in the browser without the need for a page refresh!

However, if you’re following along with the provided React app, and running either command produce the following error in the terminal:

```bash
Error: No transformers found for src/sun.svg.

```

This error is caused by the way the **.svg files** were imported. Parcel supports out-of-the-box transformers for many kinds of files without the need for additional configuration. These include **CSS**, **TypeScript**, **JSX**, and **images**.

### Transformers

#### Images - Parcel

Parcel allows you to directly import a variety of image file types to your code using `import` but they must be converted into URLs, by prepending 'url:' before the file paths.

In our example React app, we need to edit the import statement for sun.svg in Carousel.js to use the `url`: prefix like below:

```js
import sun from 'url:./sun.svg'
```

> This is no longer required if you are using `Parcel v2.8.0` or higher

If you’re still running your app on the dev server via npm run start, you should be able to see your app automatically update to display the images in your browser.

#### CSS - Parcel

When CSS files are imported directly in JavaScript with the import statement, Parcel will automatically gather all referenced CSS files and bundle them into a single CSS file at the exit point.

We import **Carousel.css** in Carousel.js like below:

```js
import './Carousel.css'
```

Parcel doesn’t need any additional transformer configurations in order to bundle the Carousel.css file.

### Putting It All Together - parcel

Now that we’ve set up **package.json** and imported our assets, running the build command should generate a **./dist folder** that holds the bundled assets of our project.

Remember that you can preview the bundled app on the dev server by running:

```js
npm run start
```

## Building Apps with Vite

We will use [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) to bundle an existing web app. [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) may be the right build tool for you if your project contains many modules as it can bundle files at lightning speed by pre-bundling dependencies.

[Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) makes it easy to start a project as it comes with [template presets](https://vitejs.dev/guide/#community-templates) for projects using vanilla JavaScript (JS), as well as frameworks such as Vue, React, Preact, Svelte, and TypeScript. Vite also provides [Hot Module Replacement](https://vitejs.dev/guide/features.html#hot-module-replacement), which is automatically configured when a project is created using create-vite. The functionalities of Vite can be easily extended by using [plugins](https://vitejs.dev/plugins/).

You can follow along with your own project or [download this simple React app for a photo carousel](https://github.com/hermkan/photo-carousel-vite/archive/refs/heads/main.zip).

Let’s get started!

### Project setup

If you are following along with your own project, make sure it is a Node.js project. Remember that you can initialize Node.js using:

```bash
npm init -y
```

If you are following along using the provided React app, the project is already a Node.js project. But you will need to install dependencies via:

```bash
npm install
```

Next, we will need to install [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) .
We can do this using npm like below:

```bash
npm install vite

```

### Vite config file

In order to properly use Vite, you will need to create a **vite.config.js** file in the root of your project. This file will contain the configuration for your project, including any additional plugins that your project may require.

Add the following code to your **vite.config.js** file:

```js
import { defineConfig } from 'vite'
export default defineConfig({})
```

### The build and serve commands

Let’s add our `start`, `build`, and `serve` commands in the "scripts" section of **package.json**. These commands are used to do either of the following:

- Serve a development build of our app.
- Build a production build.
- Serve the production build of our app locally.

```json
"scripts": {
  "start": "vite",
  "build": "vite build",
  "serve": "vite preview"
}
```

In the code block above, the build command runs with the default entry point at **./index.html** to bundle the app with the exit point at **./dist**. After running the serve command, the project is served from **./dist**.

If you are following along with the starting code of our React app, you will notice that running npm run start will produce the following error:

```bash
 > src/app.js:31:11: error: Unexpected "<"
    31 │     return <Carousel src={PATHS[currentImg]} />
       ╵            ^
```

This error is caused by Vite encountering `JSX` code in a JS file. We will address this in the next section.

### JSX - Vite

Our scripts will throw errors because our **Carousel.js** file contains JSX. While this is supported in Vite, JSX files must have the .jsx extension. If you are following along using the provided starting code, you will need to change the file extension of both App.js and **Carousel.js** to **App.jsx** and **Carousel.jsx**, respectively.

The file structure of **./src** should now look like this:

```bash
|-- src
|   |-- app.jsx
|   |-- Carousel.CSS
|   |-- Carousel.jsx
|   |-- sun.svg
```

You will also need to edit the value of the src attribute of the opening `<script>` tag in **./index.html** from **'/src/app.js'** to **'/src/app.jsx'** to reflect the change in file extension.

```html
<script type="module" src="/src/app.jsx"></script>
```

### CSS - Vite

When CSS files are imported directly in JS using the `import` statement, Vite will automatically gather all referenced CSS files and bundle them into a single CSS file at the exit point.

You will see that in the provided starting code we `import` **Carousel.css** in **Carousel.js** like below:

```js
import './Carousel.css'
```

Vite doesn’t need any plugins or config options specified in order to automatically bundle **Carousel.css** file at the exit point at **./dist**.

### Putting it all together

Now that we’ve configured our **vite.config.js** file, file extensions, and **package.json**, running the build command should generate bundled files of the project in **./dist**. Notice that the files in the **src** directory have been bundled and linked in **./dist/index.html**.

To view the bundled app in **./dist**, you will need to run:

```bash
npm run serve

```
