# Hooks

_TLDR:_

State Hook :

- With React, we feed static and dynamic data models to JSX to render a view to the screen.
- Hooks are used to “hook into” the internal component state for managing dynamic data in function components.
- We employ the State Hook using the code below. The currentState references the current value of the state and initialState initializes the value of the state for the component’s first render

Effect Hook:

- We can import the `useEffect()` function from the 'react' library and call it in our function components.

- Effect refers to a function that we pass as the first argument of the `useEffect()` function. By default, the Effect Hook calls this effect _after_ each render.

- The _cleanup function_ is _optionally_ returned by the effect. If the effect does anything that needs to be cleaned up to prevent memory leaks, then the effect needs to returns a cleanup function. The Effect Hook will call this cleanup function _before_ calling the effect again as well as when the component is being unmounted.

- The _dependency array_ is the _optional_ second argument that the `useEffect()` function can be called with in order to prevent repeatedly calling the effect when this is not needed. This array should consist of all variables that the effect depends on.

- The Effect Hook is all about scheduling when our effect’s code gets executed. We can use the dependency array to configure when our effect is called in the following ways:

| Dependency array | Effect called after first render &..           |
| ---------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| undefined        | on every re-render                             |
| Empty array      | there's no call on re-render                   |
| Non-Empty array  | when any value in the dependency array changes |

```jsx
const [currentState, stateSetter] = useState(initialState)
```

- State setters can be called in event handlers.
- We can define simple event handlers inline in our JSX and complex event handlers outside of our JSX.
- We use a state setter callback function when our next value depends on our previous value.
- We use arrays and objects to organize and manage related data that tend to change together.
- Use the spread syntax on collections of dynamic data to copy the previous state into the next state like so: `setArrayState((prev) => [ ...prev ]) and setObjectState((prev) => ({ ...prev }))`.
- It’s best practice to have multiple, simpler states instead of having one complex state object

_Learning goals:_

- Build a “stateful” function component.
- Use the State Hook.
- Initialize a state and set a state.
- Define event handlers.
- Use state setter callback functions.
- Use state with arrays and objects.

## Why Use Hooks?

React Hooks, plainly put, are functions that let us manage the internal state of components and handle post-rendering side effects directly from our function components. Using Hooks, we can _determine what we want to show the users_ by declaring how our user interface should look _based on the state_.

React offers a number of built-in Hooks. A few of these include useState(), useEffect(), useContext(), useReducer(), and useRef(). See the full list in the [React docs](https://react.dev/reference/react).

## The State hook

### Update Function Component State

The state object is where we store data in a component that is expected to change over time. When the state object changes, the component re-renders.

The state Hook is a named export from the React library, so we import with object destructuring like the following.

```jsx
import React, { useState } from 'react'
```

When we call the `useState()` function, it _returns an array_ with two values:

- The current state: The current value of this state.
- The state setter: A function that we can use to update the value of this state.

We can use these two values to track the current state of a data value or property and change it when we need to.

To extract the two values from the array, we can assign them to local variables by using array destructuring.

For example:

```jsx
const [currentState, setCurrentState] = useState()
```

Let’s have a look at another example of a function component that uses the State Hook:

```jsx
import React, { useState } from 'react'

function Toggle() {
  const [toggle, setToggle] = useState()

  return (
    <div>
      <p>The toggle is {toggle}</p>
      <button onClick={() => setToggle('On')}>On</button>
      <button onClick={() => setToggle('Off')}>Off</button>
    </div>
  )
}
```

Notice how the state setter function, `setToggle()`, is called by our `onClick` _event listeners_. To update the value of `toggle` and _re-render_ this component with the new value, all we need to do is call the `setToggle()` function with the next state value as an argument.

**Calling the state setter `signals to React that the component needs to re-render`.** so the whole function defining the component is called again.

The magic of `useState()` is that it allows React to keep track of the current value of the state from one render to the next!

### Initiialize state

We can use the State Hook to manage the value of any primitive data type and even data collections like arrays and objects!

What data type does this state variable hold?

```jsx
import React, { useState } from 'react'

function ToggleLoading() {
  const [isLoading, setIsLoading] = useState()

  return (
    <div>
      <p>The data is {isLoading ? 'Loading' : 'Not Loading'}</p>
      <button onClick={() => setIsLoading(true)}>Turn Loading On</button>
      <button onClick={() => setIsLoading(false)}>Turn Loading Off</button>
    </div>
  )
}
```

The `ToggleLoading()` function component above uses the simplest of all data types, a boolean. Booleans are frequently used in React applications to represent whether data has loaded or not. In the example above, we see that `true` and `false` values are passed to the state setter, `setIsLoading()`.

This code works just fine as is, but what if we want our component to start off with isLoading set to true?

To initialize our state with any value we want, we simply pass the initial value as an argument to the`useState()` function call

```jsx
const [isLoading, setIsLoading] = useState(true)
```

There are three ways in which this code affects our component:

- During the first render, the initial state argument is used.

- When the state setter is called, React ignores the initial state argument and uses the new value.

- When the component re-renders for any other reason, React continues to use the same value from the previous render.

If we don’t pass an initial value when calling useState(), the current value of the state during the first render will be `undefined.`

We prefer to explicitly initialize our state. If we don’t have the value needed during the first render, we can explicitly pass `null` instead of passively leaving the value as `undefined.`

### Use state setter outside of jsx

Let’s see an example of _managing the changing value of a string as a user types into a text input field_:

```jsx
import React, { useState } from 'react'

export default function EmailTextInput() {
  const [email, setEmail] = useState('')
  const handleChange = (event) => {
    const updatedEmail = event.target.value
    setEmail(updatedEmail)
  }

  return <input value={email} onChange={handleChange} />
}
```

- We use `array destructuring` to _create our local state variable email and our local setter function_ `setEmail()`.

- The local variable email is assigned the current state value at index 0 from the array returned by useState().

- The local variable `setEmail()` is assigned a reference to the state setter function at index 1 from the array returned by useState()

- It’s a convention to name the setter variable using the current state variable (in this example, `email`) with “set” prepended.

The JSX input tag has an event listener called `onChange`. This event listener calls an event handler each time the user types something in this element.

Earlier in this lesson, we wrote our event handlers right in our JSX. Those inline event handlers work perfectly fine, but when we want to do something more interesting than just calling the state setter with a static value, it’s a good practice to separate that logic from our JSX. This separation of concerns makes our code easier to read, test, and modify.

It’s common in React code to simplify this:

```jsx
const handleChange = (event) => {
  const newEmail = event.target.value
  setEmail(newEmail)
}
```

to this:

```jsx
const handleChange = (event) => setEmail(event.target.value)
```

or, using object destructuring, this:

```jsx
const handleChange = ({ target }) => setEmail(target.value)
```

All three code snippets above behave the same way, so there really isn’t a right and wrong between these different code snippets. We’ll use the last, most concise version moving forward.

### Set from previous state

We learned to update the state by passing it a new value like this:

```jsx
setState(newStateValue)
```

However, React state updates are _asynchronous_. This means that there are some scenarios where portions of your code will run before the state is finished updating.

This is a good and a bad thing! Grouping the state updates together can improve performance in your application, but it can result in outdated state values. Consequently, it is best practice to update a state with a callback function, preventing accidental outdated values.

Because the next value of count depends on the previous value of count, we pass a callback function as the argument for setCount() instead of a value (as we’ve done in previous exercises).

```jsx
setCount((prevCount) => prevCount + 1)
```

When our state setter calls the callback function, this _state setter callback function_ takes our previous count as an argument. The value returned by this state setter callback function is used as the next value of count (in this case, `prevCount + 1`).

We can also just call `setCount(count +1)` and it would work the same in this example, but for reasons that are out of scope for this lesson, it is safer to use the callback method.

### Arrays in state

JavaScript arrays are the best data model for managing and rendering _JSX lists_. Let’s take a look at the code for a website for a pizza restaurant.

```jsx
import React, { useState } from 'react'

//Static array of pizza options offered.
const options = ['Bell Pepper', 'Sausage', 'Pepperoni', 'Pineapple']

export default function PersonalPizza() {
  const [selected, setSelected] = useState([])

  const toggleTopping = ({ target }) => {
    const clickedTopping = target.value
    setSelected((prev) => {
      // check if clicked topping is already selected
      if (prev.includes(clickedTopping)) {
        // filter the clicked topping out of state
        return prev.filter((t) => t !== clickedTopping)
      } else {
        // add the clicked topping to our state
        return [clickedTopping, ...prev]
      }
    })
  }

  return (
    <div>
      {options.map((option) => (
        <button value={option} onClick={toggleTopping} key={option}>
          {selected.includes(option) ? 'Remove ' : 'Add '}
          {option}
        </button>
      ))}
      <p>Order a {selected.join(', ')} pizza</p>
    </div>
  )
}
```

In the above example, we are using two arrays:

- The options array contains the names of all of the pizza toppings available.
- The selected array represents the selected toppings for our personal pizza.

The options array contains _static data_, meaning that it does not change (It’s best practice to define static data models outside of function components since they don’t need to be recreated each time our component re-renders). In our JSX, we use the JavaScript `.map()` method to render a button for each of the toppings in our options array.

The selected array contains _dynamic data_, meaning that it changes, usually based on a user’s actions.

We initialize `selected` as an empty array. When a button is clicked, the `toggleTopping()` event handler is called. Notice how this event handler uses information from the event object to determine which topping was clicked.

When `updating an array in a state`, we do not just `add new data to the previous array`.
We _replace the previous array with a brand new array_. As a result, any information that we want to save from the previous array needs to be explicitly copied over to our new array. That’s what this spread syntax does for us: `...prev`

Notice how we use the `.includes(),` `.filter()`, and `.map()` methods of our arrays.
Investing time to strengthen our JavaScript skills will always help us do more faster (and have a lot more fun doing it) as React developers.

### Objects in state

We can also use state with objects. When we work with a set of related variables, it can be very helpful to group them into an object. Let’s look at an example of this in action.

```jsx
export default function Login() {
  const [formState, setFormState] = useState({})
  const handleChange = ({ target }) => {
    const { name, value } = target
    setFormState((prev) => ({
      ...prev,
      [name]: value, // we use this syntax to identify which input the change event came from
    }))
  }

  return (
    <form>
      <input
        value={formState.firstName}
        onChange={handleChange}
        name="firstName"
        type="text"
      />
      <input
        value={formState.password}
        onChange={handleChange}
        type="password"
        name="password"
      />
    </form>
  )
}
```

- We use a state setter callback function to update a state based on the previous value.
- The spread syntax is the same for objects as for arrays: { ...oldObject, newKey: newValue }.
- We reuse our event handler across multiple inputs by `using the input tag’s name attribute to identify which input the change event came from`.

Once again, when updating the state with `setFormState()` inside a function component, we do not modify the same object. We must copy over the values from the previous object when setting the next value of a state. Thankfully, the spread syntax makes this super easy to do.

Anytime one of the input values is updated, the handleChange() function will be called. Inside this event handler, we `use object destructuring to unpack the target property` from our event object, then we use object destructuring again to`unpack the name and value properties from the target object`.

Inside our state setter callback function, we wrap our curly brackets in parentheses like so:

```jsx
setFormState((prev) => ({ ...prev }))
```

This tells JavaScript that our curly brackets refer to a new object to be returned. We use ..., the spread operator, to fill in the corresponding fields from our previous state. Finally, we `overwrite the appropriate key with its updated value`.

Notice the square brackets around the name? This [Computed Property Name](http://eloquentcode.com/computed-property-names-in-javascript) allows us to use the string value stored by the name variable as a property key.

### Separate Hooks for Separate state

While there are times when it can be helpful to store related data in a data collection, like an array or object, it can also be helpful to create different state variables for data that change separately. Managing dynamic data is much easier when we keep our data models as simple as possible.

For example, if we had a single object that held state for a subject you are studying at school, it might look something like this:

```jsx
function Subject() {
  const [state, setState] = useState({
    currentGrade: 'B',
    classmates: ['Hasan', 'Sam', 'Emma'],
    classDetails: {topic: 'Math', teacher: 'Ms. Barry', room: 201};
    exams: [{unit: 1, score: 91}, {unit: 2, score: 88}]);
  });
```

This would work, but think about how messy it could get to copy over all the other values when we need to update something in this big state object. For example, to update the grade on an exam, we would need an event handler that did something like this:

```jsx
setState((prev) => ({
  ...prev,
  exams: prev.exams.map((exam) => {
    if (exam.unit === updatedExam.unit) {
      return {
        ...exam,
        score: updatedExam.score,
      }
    } else {
      return exam
    }
  }),
}))
```

Complex code like this is likely to cause bugs. It’s best to create multiple state variables based on which values tend to change together.

We can rewrite the previous example as follows:

```jsx
function Subject() {
  const [currentGrade, setGrade] = useState('B')
  const [classmates, setClassmates] = useState(['Hasan', 'Sam', 'Emma'])
  const [classDetails, setClassDetails] = useState({
    topic: 'Math',
    teacher: 'Ms. Barry',
    room: 201,
  })
  const [exams, setExams] = useState([
    { unit: 1, score: 91 },
    { unit: 2, score: 88 },
  ])
  // ...
}
```

Often, we find ourselves packaging and organizing data in collections to pass between components, then separating that data within components where different parts of the data change separately. The wonderful thing about working with Hooks is that we have the freedom to organize our data in the way that makes the most sense to us.

## The Effect hook

### Why use useEffect?

We’ll use the Effect Hook to run some JavaScript code _after each render_ to:

- fetch data from a back-end service.
- subscribe to a stream of data.
- manage timers and intervals.
- read from and make changes to the DOM.

Components will re-render multiple times throughout their lifetime. These key moments present the perfect opportunity to execute these “side effects”

There are three key moments when the Effect Hook can be utilized:

1. When the component is first added, or mounted, to the DOM and renders.
2. When the state or props change, causing the component to re-render.
3. When the component is removed, or unmounted, from the DOM.

### Function Component Effects

The Effect Hook tells our component to _do something_ every time it’s rendered (or re-rendered). Combined with states, we can use the Effect Hook to create interesting dynamic changes in our web pages!

Suppose we want to allow a user to change the title of the web page tab every time they type. We can implement this with the Effect Hook (useEffect()) like so:

```jsx
import React, { useState, useEffect } from 'react'

function PageTitle() {
  const [name, setName] = useState('')

  useEffect(() => {
    document.title = `Hi, ${name}`
  })

  return (
    <div>
      <p>Use the input field below to rename this page!</p>
      <input
        onChange={({ target }) => setName(target.value)}
        value={name}
        type="text"
      />
    </div>
  )
}
```

- First, we import the Effect Hook from the 'react' library:

```jsx
import { useEffect } from 'react'
```

- The `useEffect()` function has no return value(as opposed to useState() for example)
- We pass the callback function, or effect, to _run after a component renders_ as the argument of the `useEffect()` function. Effects _run after every render and not just once_. In our example, the following effect runs after each time the PageTitle component renders:

```jsx
;() => {
  document.title = `Hi, ${name}`
}
```

Here, we assign `Hi, ${name}` as the value of`document.title`.

The `onChange` event listener triggers the PageTitle component to be re-rendered every time the user types in the input. Consequently, this triggers `useEffect()` and changes the document’s title.

Notice how we use the current _state_ inside of our effect. Even though our effect is called after the component renders, we still have access to the variables _in the scope of our function component_! (javascript `closure`).

### Clean Up Effects

Some effects require **cleanup**. For example, we might want to add event listeners to some element in the DOM, beyond the JSX in our component. When we add event listeners to the DOM, it is important to remove those event listeners when we are done with them to avoid **memory leaks**!
Let’s consider the following effect:

```jsx
useEffect(() => {
  document.addEventListener('keydown', handleKeyPress)
  // Specify how to clean up after the effect:
  return () => {
    document.removeEventListener('keydown', handleKeyPress)
  }
})
```

If our effect didn’t return a cleanup function, a new event listener would be added to the DOM’s document object every time that our component re-renders. Not only would this cause bugs, but it could cause our application performance to diminish and maybe even crash!

Because effects _run after every render_ and not just once, React calls our cleanup function _before each re-render_ and _before unmounting_ to clean up each effect call. React will call this cleanup function before the component re-renders or unmounts.

`Component Render -> Effect -> Cleanup function -> Component Re-render -> Effect`

If our effect returns a function, then the useEffect() Hook always treats that as the cleanup function.

Since this cleanup function is optional, it is our responsibility to return a cleanup function from our effect when our effect code could create memory leaks.

### Control when effects are called

What if we want to skip calling our effect on re-renders altogether?.

It is common, when defining function components, to run an effect _only when the component mounts_ (renders the first time), but _not when the component re-renders_. The Effect Hook makes this very easy for us to do! If we want to only call our effect after the first render, we pass an empty array to `useEffect()` as the second argument. This second argument is called the **dependency array.**

The dependency array is used to tell the `useEffect()` method _when_ to call our effect and _when_ to skip it. Our effect is _always_ called _after the first render_ but _only called again_ if something in our dependency array has changed values between renders.

We will continue to learn more about this second argument over the next few exercises, but for now, we’ll focus on using an empty dependency array to call an effect when a component first mounts, and if a cleanup function is returned by our effect, calling that when the component unmounts.

```jsx
useEffect(() => {
  alert('component rendered for the first time')
  return () => {
    alert('component is being removed from the DOM')
  }
}, [])
```

Without passing an empty array as the second argument to the `useEffect()` above, those alerts would be displayed _before_ and _after_ every render of our component, which is clearly not when those messages are meant to be displayed. Simply passing `[]`to the `useEffect()` function is enough to configure when the effect and cleanup functions are called.

### Fetch Data

We’ve learned that the default behavior of the Effect Hook is to call the effect function _after_ every single render.

Next, we learned that we can pass an empty array as the second argument for `useEffect()` if we want our effect to be called _once_ _after_ the component’s _first_ render.

In this exercise, we’ll learn to use the dependency array to further configure exactly when we want our effect to be called!

When our effect is responsible for fetching data from a server, we pay extra close attention to when our effect is called. Unnecessary round trips back and forth between our React components and the server can be costly in terms of:

- Processing
- Performance
- Data usage for mobile users
- API service fees

When the data that our components need to render doesn’t change, we can pass an empty dependency array so that the data is fetched _after_ the _first_ render. When the response is received from the server, we can use a `state setter` from the State Hook to _store_ the data from the server’s response in our `local component state` for future renders. Using the State Hook and the Effect Hook together in this way is a powerful pattern that saves our components from unnecessarily fetching new data after every render!

An empty dependency array signals to the Effect Hook that our effect never needs to be _re-run_ that it doesn’t depend on anything. Specifying zero dependencies means that the result of running that effect _won’t change_ and calling our effect _once_ is enough.

A dependency array that is not empty signals to the Effect Hook that it can _skip_ calling our effect after re-renders _unless_ the value of one of the variables in our dependency array has changed. If the value of a dependency has changed, then the Effect Hook will call our effect again!

Here’s a nice example from the [official React docs](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-effect.html#tip-optimizing-performance-by-skipping-effects):

```jsx
useEffect(() => {
  document.title = `You clicked ${count} times`
}, [count]) // Only re-run the effect if the value stored by count changes
```

### Rules of Hooks

There are two main rules to keep in mind when using Hooks:

1. Only call Hooks at the top level.
2. Only call Hooks from React functions.

As we have been practicing with the State Hook and the Effect Hook, we’ve been following these rules with ease, but it is helpful to keep these two rules in mind as you take your new understanding of Hooks out into the wild and begin using more Hooks in your React applications.

The `Virtual DOM`, In React, virtual DOM is a conceptual representation of the actual DOM object, like a lightweight copy. A virtual DOM object has the same properties as a real DOM object, but it lacks the real thing’s power to directly change what’s on the screen.

When React builds the `Virtual DOM`, the library calls the functions that define our components over and over again as the user interacts with the user interface. React keeps track of the data and functions that we are managing with Hooks based on their order in the function component’s definition. For this reason, we always call our Hooks at the top level; we never call hooks inside of loops, conditions, or nested functions.

Instead of confusing React with code like this:

```jsx
if (userName !== '') {
  useEffect(() => {
    localStorage.setItem('savedUserName', userName);
  });

```

We can accomplish the same goal while consistently calling our Hook every time:

```jsx
useEffect(() => {
  if (userName !== '') {
    localStorage.setItem('savedUserName', userName)
  }
})
```

Secondly, Hooks can only be used in React Functions. We’ve been working with `useState()` and `useEffect()` in _function_ components, and this is the most common use. The only other place where Hooks can be used is within `custom hooks`. Custom Hooks are incredibly useful for organizing and reusing _stateful logic_ between function components.

### Separate Hooks for Separate Effects

When multiple values are closely related and change at the same time, it can make sense to group these values in a collection like an object or array. Packaging data together can also add complexity to the code responsible for managing that data. Therefore, it is a good idea to separate concerns by managing different data with different Hooks.

It is not always obvious whether to bundle data together or separate it, but with practice, we get better at organizing our code so that it is easier to understand, add to, reuse, and test!
