# React forms

_TLDR_:

- The state of a React form is managed by the component, and updates are triggered by the onChange event.
- The onChange event uses an event handler to capture changes and determine what actions to take.

- A React form uses the State hook to store the value of the input field in the component’s state. The state can then be updated with the state setter.

- React components can be controlled or uncontrolled. Most React forms are controlled, as they control the input’s value with the state.

## Input onChange

In a regular HTML form, the _state_ of the form is typically managed by the browser. It doesn’t update the server until the user hits submit.

Things work a bit differently in React. In a React form, the state of the form can be managed by the component, and updates are triggered by the `onChange` event. When the user interacts with an input, such as entering or deleting any characters, the `onChange` event fires and updates the component state, which in turn causes the component to re-render.

This allows the component to immediately reflect any changes made by the user and update the view accordingly.

## Write an Input event handler

Let’s define an event handler function that gets called whenever a user enters or deletes any character inside the `<input>` element.

The event handler function will listen for change events.

```jsx
import React, { useState } from 'react'

function Example() {
  const [userInput, setUserInput] = useState('')
  function handleChange(e) {
    setUserInput(e.target.value)
  }
  return <input onChange={handleChange} type="text" />
}
```

## Set the input's initial state

Good! Any time that someone types or deletes in the `<input>` field, the `handleUserInput()` function will update userInput with the `<input>‘s` text.

Since we’re using `setUserInput`, that means that userInput needs an initial state! We’ll need to use the State hook. What should the state’s initial value be?

The initial text in the `<input>` when a user first visits the page.

The initial text should be an empty string!

## Update the input's initial state

When a user types in the `<input>` field, then that will trigger a change event, which will call`handleUserInput()`.

handleUserInput() will set userInput equal to whatever text is currently in the `<input>` field. That’s also good!

There’s only one problem: you can set userInput to whatever you want, but `<input>‘s` value prop will not update.

In React, the value prop of an input element is used to control the value of the input and keep it in sync with the component’s state.
Without setting the value prop, changes made to the input would not be reflected in the component’s state, leading to inconsistencies and potential bugs down the line.

To ensure that the input’s value matches the component state, we can set the value prop and use the onChange event to update the state with the new value. When the state is updated, the component re-renders, and the value prop is set to the new value from the component’s state.

This makes the component state the “source of truth” for the input’s value, ensuring that the form data is consistent and can be easily managed and submitted.

```jsx
import React, { useState } from 'react'

function Example() {
  const [userInput, setUserInput] = useState('')
  function handleChange(e) {
    setUserInput(e.target.value)
  }
  return <input value={userInput} onChange={handleChange} type="text" />
}
```

## Controlled vs Uncontrolled

There are two terms that will probably come up when you talk about React forms: **controlled component** and **uncontrolled component**.

An uncontrolled component is a component that maintains its own internal state. A controlled component is a component that does not maintain any internal state. Since a controlled component has no state, it must be controlled by someone else.

Think of a typical <input type='text' /> element. It appears on the screen as a text box. If you need to know what text is currently in the box, then you can ask the `<input>` element, possibly with some code like this:

```js
let input = document.querySelector('input[type="text"]')

let typedText = input.value // input.value will be equal to whatever text is currently in the text box.
```

The important thing here is that the `<input>` element _keeps track_ of its own text. You can access what its text is at any time.

The fact that `<input>` keeps track of information makes it an _uncontrolled_ component. It maintains its own internal state by remembering data about itself.

A controlled component, on the other hand, has no memory. If you ask it for information about itself, then it will have to get that information through `props`. Most React components are _controlled_.

In React, when you give an `<input>` element a value attribute, then something strange happens: the `<input>` element becomes controlled. It stops using its internal storage. This is a more “React” way of doing things.

You can find more information about [controlled and uncontrolled components](https://react.dev/learn/sharing-state-between-components#controlled-and-uncontrolled-components) in the React documentation.
